Welcome to OS/Micro!

If you can see this, you have successfully booted into OS/M and run
your first program - the pager.

From here, you try whatever you want from the shell. I would recommend
trying to pong game, as primitive as it is, because it shows you
what to expect from 'graphics' on the Ozpex Micro. If you're stuck,
remember from the README that the pong game actually uses vim's
j/k keys for movement.

In reality, there is not much you can actually do from within OS/M.
Only about 3 programs exist for it that I know of, and those programs
mainly serve as demos of the system. The primary purpose of OS/M
and the Ozpex Micro as a whole is to serve as a rewarding and simple
retro system to target and practice your assembly skills in.

To that end, this document will help you get started with OS/M
development. There don't currently exist any development tools
that run from within the OS/M environment, so you will have to
cross assemble. Thankfully, it is incredibly easy to start writing
assembly for OS/M on your machine.

First, you will need a Z80 assembler. I recommend vasmz80_oldstyle,
which you can find here:

  <http://www.compilers.de/vasm.html>

Once you have the right vasm binary, you will also need the OS/M
libraries which you can download from my Github releases page:

  <https://github.com/BeauConstrictor/OS-Micro/releases>

That should be all you need (besides an Ozpex Micro emulator, but
I assume you already have one if you are reading this). As a quick
sanity test, you can compile this quick 'Hello, world!' program
and build it with vasm:

    .include "mmap.asm"
    .org RUN_LOAD
  start:
    ld   hl,message
    call print
    ret
  message:
    .asciiz "Hello, world!\n"
    .include "io.asm"

This is how you assemble that program (assuming you named it
'hello.asm'):

  vasmz80_oldstyle -Fbin -dotdir -esc -o hello hello.asm

Then, you need to create a disk image which you can load into your
emulator. The OS/M release includes a utility for this called
'fs128-tool.py'. Here is how you would pack that binary into an
FS/128 image using it:

  python3 fs128-tool.py -o mydisk.bin hello

This will output a 'mydisk.bin' file which you can load into your
Ozpex Micro emulator. If you are using my emulator, ozm, this is the
command that you would use:

  ozm -m bdsk:osm.bin@0 disk:mydisk.bin@1

That command will mount the osm distribution into device slot 00 and
your new disk into slot 01.

From here, you can switch to disk 01 and run your program! If you
haven't used the dsk command before, here is what you would need to
do:

  00 ~> dsk 01
  01 ~> dir
  06# hello
  01 ~> run 06
  Hello, world!

Congratulations! You have just built and run your first OS/M program.

From here, you should start experimenting with the OS/M libraries.
Unlike most retro OSs such as CP/M, these libraries are actually
assembled along with your program and interact directly with the
hardware - they don't go through a BIOS. This is because the Ozpex
Micro's hardware model is simple and extensible enough that you can
implement it individually in every program on your computer without
bloating the binary sizes too much.

If you want to read more about the Ozpex Micro's device model, check
back on the repo soon, as I am in the middle of writing a document
on that topic.

Currently, 3 libraries are included, which you can find in the
release on Github:

1. fs.asm -  The most complex library, implements the FS/128
             filesystem to allow you to read, write, create, etc.
             files. This filesystem was originally designed for the
             Ozpex 128, but that similar device model means it could
             be carried over.
2. io.asm -  The library you will use most often, includes I/O
             routines for printing strings, reading lines of input and
             parsing and outputting hex.
3. dev.asm - A small library currently, that lets you programatically
             discover devices installed in your machine. This one will
             be more useful in the future when the Ozpex Micro designs
             more standard devices.

Let's start with io.asm, as this is the only library that your
'Hello, world!' program from earlier includes. You have already seen
the 'print' routine, which takes, in the hl register, a pointer to
a sequence of characters followed by a terminating null, or 0, byte.
Vasm allows you to create one of these 'strings' easily using the
'.asciiz' directive.

For a more thorough description of every subroutine included in every
library, I implore you to read through the source code. which contains
plenty of comments for documents. I find it easier to keep my
documentation up-to-date when it is in the same place as the source
code.

Otherwise, I hope you are now in a comfortable position to start
writing Z80 assembly! If you still feel lost, take a look at any
of the programs I have written that go into the distribution disk. I'm
told they're quite readable, and I haven't spent my time on any one of
them (pong took me a grand total of 45 minutes), so they're all fairly
simple.

---------------------------------
DID YOU JUST RUN THE TXT COMMAND?
---------------------------------

If you tried to read this file using the txt command, try using the
pager program so you can read from the top. You can use it like this:

  00 ~> run <pager's fid, it changes between releases>
  Terminal lines (in two-digit hex!)? xx
  FID? <the same number you passed to the txt command>

If your unsure how many lines your terminal has, run this command in
your normal shell:

  printf '%02x\n' "$(tput lines)"

Good luck!
